In the poem “My car is faster than yours” by Ella Maria Tully from the year 1960 the speaker describes how their life changed since they met a person with whom they fell in love with. This theme captures the poem’s key aspect of how much your life changes after you find love to a point where it’s almost like a rebirth. In my essay I will focus on how the non-semantic features especially the rhythm with the irregular iambic tetrameter emphasises this fast change of feelings and how the stylistic devices especially the alliteration creates an image of rebirth.
In the first paragraph it will be focused on the form of the poem and the rhyme scheme.
In the second paragraph it shall be inspected on the semantic features especially the stylistic devices and how they emphasize the key aspect of this poem.
In the fourth paragraph the alliterations in this poem shall be inspected and how they create an image of rebirth.
In the last paragraph it will be described how the rhythm captures the rush of change of the speaker’s feelings and how it also emphasizes the image of rebirth the author created.
 
The poem has 14 lines and is not divided into stanzas. This emphasizes the rush of feelings the narrator is describing. The thoughts are not captured in clear thought processes that are divided into stanzas. This captures the feeling of an overflow of emotions that are written down.
Also noticeable is the rhyme scheme. The poem has 14 end rhymes and starts with 8 lines of embracing rhymes (abba abba) and ends with 6 lines of cross rhymes (cdc dcd).
The end rhymes bring a natural flow while reading the poem, which again emphasises a very natural rush of feeling but also how “clear” and “easy” the love feels for the speaker.
Just like there is a shift in the rhyme scheme there is also a little shift in the tone of the poem after the 8 lines of embracing rhymes. While the first 8 lines focus on how much the speaker’s life has changed since they found love the last 6 lines focus on praising the person who brought love in their life (l. 9 “And praise its sweetness, Sweet, with thee anear”). In these last lines it feels like the speaker is reaching their climax of feelings enhanced by the rhyming couplets who follow through until the end of the poem and have the effect as if the feelings would increase even more with every end rhyme.
 
Throughout the poem there are also stylistic devices that highlight certain aspects of the poem.
The first one that strikes out is a hyperbole in the very first line of the poem: “The face of the world is changed, I think,”. This emphasizes how strong the speaker’s feelings for the person who came into their life are. Setting this hyperbole at the beginning stresses how much their life has changed because they fell in love. So much that it feels like the whole world has changed too. This first line sets the tone for the rest of the poem. Interesting to note is also the “I think” (l. 1) that immediately follows the hyperbole. It stresses a tone of uncertainty in the speaker’s description. Not in the love itself but more in the way the speaker tries to describe their feelings. As if this new feeling of love came so quickly that the speaker had not got the time to get their thoughts in order and is now writing their overflow of emotions down. This line is also stressed by a personification “the face of all world” (l. 1) and brings a very vivid image to the reader’s mind. In the next two lines are two more personifications: “the footsteps of thy soul” (l. 2) and “as they stole” (l. 3). The speaker talks about their lover’s soul and gives it humanistic traits. This shows that their love is not something superficial but goes as deep as the soul.
 
Another important stylistic device is the alliteration that can be found in line 5: “Of obvious death, where I, who thought to sink,”. The alliteration emphasizes the words ‘obvious’ and is followed by the word ‘death’. The reader gets the feeling as if the speaker was already very close to an inevitable metaphorical death before they met the person they fell in love with. It creates a symbolic picture of a rebirth. This image of rebirth is strengthened in the next alliteration in line 8: “God gave for baptism, I am fain to drink”. Because the alliteration is in both cases at the beginning of the line both lines are highlighted and almost mirror each other. Before they fell in love they were “of obvious death” (l. 5) and after they found love it was almost like a rebirth: “God gave for baptism” (l. 8). In the first alliteration the following word is “death” and in the second it is “for baptism”. Baptism is a word which is often associated with birth and God brings the image of the giver of life. This image of rebirth is also emphasised in the rhythm in these two lines which will be discussed in the next paragraph.
 
The fast change of feelings and the image of rebirth is also emphasised by the rhythm of the poem. The poem has an almost constant iambic tetrameter with some irregulars. The iambic is a very natural meter which brings a natural flow to the reading and not only emphasizes the flow of emotions but also shows how easy these feelings come to the speaker. This iambic is however paired with a tetrameter which has an unnatural number of feet. The reader stumbles across the meter which again reflects an uncertainty in the overflow of emotions. The natural meter paired with an unnatural number of feet emphasizes the feeling of how fast this new found love came to the speaker. As mentioned previously there are some irregularities in the iambic tetrameter.
One can be found in line 7:
 
   x    /    x   /        x     /        /      x          /      x     /  
“Of life in a new rhythm. The cup of dole”


In this line the metrum is capturing the text in a literal sense. The speaker is using the metaphor of the rhythm to symbolize how different their life is now while on a non-semantic level there is a literal change of rhythm because of the spondee with an extra stress on the word “rhythm”. The change of rhythm is mirroring what the speaker is saying in the text.
 This change of the regular iambic tetrameter can also be noticed in line 5:


    x     / x   /           /              x     /    x         /       x     /
“Of obvious death, where I, who thought to sink,”
  
In this line there is a spondee with an extra stress on death. Just like the alliteration this emphasizes the word and the reader gets a vivid image of the death. In the next line the meter goes back to an iambic tetrameter. This change can also be found on the textual level: “Was caught up into love” (l. 6). The rhythm changes in line 5 with the word death and it creates a dark theme but just like the narrator was “caught up” (l. 6) by their lover the rhythm also gets caught up again and goes back to the regular iambic tetrameter.
Another spondee can also be found again in line 8:
 
     x          /    x      /     /            x    /    x   /          x
“God gave for baptism, I am fain to drink,”
 
In this line there is an extra stress on baptism. The word baptism brings the image of birth, like a newborn child that has to be baptized. This line mirrors line 5 as it has the exact same stress pattern and as mentioned previously has  an alliteration at the beginning.  In line 5 the extra stress is on the word “death” and in line 8 is it on “baptism”. Death and Birth are mirroring each other. It creates the metaphor of a rebirth the speaker is experiencing because they found love. The rhythm strengthens the message of the semantic features on the non-semantic level.
 
In conclusion, the iambic tetrameter and the rhyme scheme create a very natural reading flow which captures the easiness the narrator is feeling because of their newfound love. The rhythm not only mirrors the poem in a literal dimension. With the change of rhythm and together with the alliteration it also enhances the image of death and birth and thus creates an image of rebirth.